---
title: "Learning How to Learn Part 1"
date: "2015-11-08 10:00:00 +1100"
tags: learning
---

Last week, I discovered a wonderful course, [Learning How to
Learn](https://www.coursera.org/learn/learning-how-to-learn), from UC San Diego
on Coursera. This course was taught by two prestigious scientists in
neuroscience, [Barbara Oakley](https://twitter.com/barbaraoakley) and [Terrence
Sejnowski](https://twitter.com/sejnowski). After following the material from the
first week, I feel the urge to take some notes of my own understanding.

## What is learning

As far as our brains are concerned, learning something new means forming new
neuro pathways in the brain. The newly formed pathways are not strong, which is
why we tend to forget new stuff more easily, but they can be strengthened by
repeated practise of the new stuff we've learnt. Instead of intensive practise
in one day, the best outcome could be achived by arranging the practises
according to “spaced repetition”. For example, let's say you are trying to
remember a few new words from a foreign language that you are learning, you'll
get much stronger long term memory of the words if you study them 15 minutes on
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday, rather than spend two hours
studying them in one day.

## Focused and Diffused modes

Our brains can operate in two different modes: focused mode and diffused mode.
They are like the two sides of the same coin: one's brain can either be in
focused mode or diffused mode, but not in both. In focused mode, your frontal
lobe cortex (the conscience self) is at work, and the neural signals mainly
travel in existing pathways. For example, when a second grade student is working
on elementary math problems, he/she is consciencely using methods he/she already
know to solve the problems. In diffused mode, for instance when your mind is
wandering or you're dreaming, the conscience self is not in control, so the
neural signals travel more freely and widely. This mode helps the brain connects
“unrelated” concepts together and forms new ideas or understanding.

## Multitasking

It was believed human brain can hold up to seven items at one time, but recent
researches have shown the number may be just four. Therefore, human brains are
intrinsically not good at multitasking. Try not to work on two tasks at once.
You'll very like to fail at both tasks. In the interview, Dr. Sejnowski talked
about his own multitasking. But what he meant was just quick context switching
between multiple tasks, instead of actually doing two or more things at the same
time.

## Sleeping

The brain generate toxic products while you are awake. During sleep, the neurons
will shrink, unblocking the stream, so that the metabolic toxins in the brain
can be washed out by flowing fluid. Sleep is the brain's way of keeping itself
clean and healthy. Furthermore, the brain operates in diffused mode while you
are sleeping, and rehearses what you have learnt during the day or before
sleeping, which helps to deepen and strenthen the new neural pathways formed
during focused mode studies earlier.

## Neuron production

All the textbooks say that you get all your neurons at birth. When you grow up,
new neural connections are made, but no new neurons are generated in the brain.
The neurons may die, which means you have a shrinking cortex. But Rusty Gage
discovered new neurons are birn in the Hippocampus of a adult brain. The
conditions being: a) in a enriched environment, where you can communicate with
other people and actively participate in events; or b) physical exercise.
Exercises not only help make the body stronger, but also help the Hippocampus to
give birth to new neurons and provide time for the brain to operate in diffused
mode, which in turn benefit your learning.
